DOC-14382 channel history (#973)
couchbaselabs/docs-sync-gateway: modules/manage/pages/channel-history.adoc

For the full API reference, see xref:ROOT:rest_api_admin_static.adoc#tag/Document/operation/get_keyspace-_channel_history[GET /{keyspace}/_channel_history/{docid}].

=== Compact Document Channel History

Remove channel history entries from one or more documents older than a specified sequence number.

*Endpoint:* `POST /{keyspace}/_channel_history/{docid}/compact`

*Required RBAC roles:* Sync Gateway Application

[cols="1,3"]
|===
| Request body field | Description

| `seq` (required)
| Sequence number boundary.
All channel history entries with sequences earlier than this value are removed from the specified documents.
|===

*Example request:*

[source,bash]
----
POST /mydb/_channel_history/order-12345/compact
----

[source,json]
----
{
  "seq": 98765
}
----

*Example response:*

[source,json]
----
{
  "compacted_channels": [
    "orders-2023",
    "orders-archived"
  ]
}
----

The response is a list of channels that were compacted.

For the full API reference, see xref:ROOT:rest_api_admin_static.adoc#tag/Document/operation/post_keyspace-_channel_history-compact[POST /{keyspace}/_channel_history/{docid}/compact].

== User Channel History

> === About User Channel History

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== About User Access History
```

{sgw} maintains a history of channel access grants and revocations for each user.
In deployments where channels are frequently granted and revoked, this history grows indefinitely in the user's metadata document.

The operational impact is specific to zero-checkpoint replications.
When a Couchbase Lite client performs a clear-start replication, such as after an app reinstall or a checkpoint rollback, {sgw} replays the user's full channel history.
Old revocation entries in that history are re-sent to the client for channels that are no longer relevant, causing {sgw} to perform unnecessary work and potentially triggering conflict resolution on the client.

Selectively removing channel entries from the history prevents {sgw} from sending revocations for those channels during future zero-checkpoint replications.
The operation does not affect the user's current channel access, does not modify underlying documents, and does not interrupt active continuous replications.

> === Retrieve User Channel History

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Retrieve User Access History
```

Before compacting, retrieve the current channel access history for a user to confirm which channels are recorded.

*Endpoint:* `GET /{db}/_user/{name}/_access_history`

*Required RBAC roles:* Sync Gateway Architect, Sync Gateway Application, Sync Gateway Application Read Only

*Example request:*

[source,bash]
----
GET /mydb/_user/alice/_access_history
----

*Example response:*

[source,json]
----
{
  "channels": {
    "inventory": {
      "default": [
        "warehouse-east",
        "warehouse-west-2023",
        "warehouse-archived"
      ]
    }
  }
}
----

> The response shows all channel history entries organised by scope and collection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The response shows all access history entries organised by scope and collection.
```

For the full API reference, see xref:ROOT:rest_api_admin_static.adoc#tag/Database-Security/operation/get_db-_user-name-_access_history[GET /{db}/_user/{name}/_access_history].

> === Compact User Channel History

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Compact User Access History
```

Remove specific channel entries from a user's channel access history.

*Endpoint:* `POST /{db}/_user/{name}/_access_history/compact`

*Required RBAC roles:* Sync Gateway Architect, Sync Gateway Application

Provide the channels you want to remove, organised by scope and collection.

*Example request:*

[source,bash]
----
POST /mydb/_user/alice/_access_history/compact
----

[source,json]
----
{
  "channels": {
    "inventory": {
      "default": [
        "warehouse-west-2023",
        "warehouse-archived"
      ]
    }
  }
}
----

*Example response:*

[source,json]
----
{
  "compacted_channels": {
    "inventory": {
      "default": [
        "warehouse-west-2023",
        "warehouse-archived"
      ]
    }
  }
}
----

> The response confirms the channels removed from the user's history.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The response confirms the channels removed from the user's access history.
```

include::ROOT:partial$_set_page_context.adoc[]

:param-abstract:
:topic-group: Manage
:param-related: {release-notes--xref}
include::ROOT:partial$_show_page_header_block.adoc[]

== Overview

{sgw} tracks channel assignments for both documents and users in internal metadata.
This history accumulates over time and is retained indefinitely by default.

In high-churn deployments where documents and users frequently enter and leave channels, this history can grow large enough to cause two problems:

* *Metadata bloat:* Document `_sync` attributes and user documents grow continuously, increasing storage overhead and degrading performance.
* *Unnecessary revocations:* When a Couchbase Lite client performs a zero-checkpoint (clear-start) replication, such as after an app reinstall or checkpoint rollback, {sgw} replays the full channel history. Old revocation entries in that history are re-sent to the client even for channels that are no longer relevant.

{sgw} 4.1 introduces Admin REST API endpoints that let administrators selectively remove historical channel entries from documents and users.

> This is a Phase 1 implementation designed for power users who are willing to manage the process manually.

Reviewer: I'm not sure if we want to mention that this is just a phase 1 implementation and there is a future improvement for phase 2. I haven't seen instances where we mention future roadmap things in the public documentation.

Author: I've taken this out and updated it. Thank you!

Both operations are non-destructive to document content and do not interrupt active replications.

[NOTE]
====
Phase 2 automated compaction is not available in {sgw} 4.1.
====

== Document Channel History

=== About Document Channel History

{sgw} stores channel assignment history in the `_sync` extended attribute (xattr) of each document.
This history tracks which channels a document has been assigned to and when it left each channel, using database sequence numbers rather than timestamps.

Each time a document is assigned to a channel and then removed, a new entry is added to its channel history.
For documents that move through many channels over time, this history grows without bound.

> You can remove inactive channel history entries older than a specified sequence number.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can remove channel history entries older than a specified sequence number.
```
There can be active channels that have entries in the history as well, the history will also be compacted

> If you use the current database head sequence, all inactive channel history is removed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you use the current database head sequence, all entries in the channel history is removed.
```

> If the document no longer belongs to any active channels after the operation, {sgw} removes the `_sync` attribute from the document entirely.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
This is not true, there will still be some `_sync` xattr values left behind, it just removes all the entries from the history and channels

The operation removes only historical entries.
It does not affect the document body, active channel assignments, or ongoing replications.

=== Identify a Safe Sequence Boundary

Before pruning, identify the sequence number to use as the boundary.
All inactive channel history entries with sequences below this number are removed.

To get the current database head sequence, call `GET /{db}/` and read the `update_seq` field from the response:

[source,bash]
----
GET /{db}/
----

[source,json]
----
{
  "db_name": "db",
  "update_seq": 98765,
  ...
}
----

Use the `update_seq` value as the `seq` parameter to perform a deep clean of all historical channel entries for the targeted documents.

[NOTE]
====
Choose the sequence boundary carefully.
Any inactive channel history at or before the sequence you provide is permanently removed.
This operation cannot be undone.
====

=== Retrieve Document Channel History

> Before compacting, retrieve the current inactive channel history for a document to confirm what will be removed.

Reviewer: The GET endpoint is not just to confirm what will be removed, it can also be used to get a particular sequence to partially compact the channel history of the document

> *Endpoint:* `GET /{keyspace}/_history`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Endpoint:* `GET /{keyspace}/_channel_history/{docid}`
```

*Required RBAC roles:* Sync Gateway Application, Sync Gateway Application Read Only

[cols="1,3"]
|===

> | Query parameter | Description

Reviewer: We are no longer using query parameters, we're using path parameters instead. The GET endpoint does not take any seq value. Please checkout the [API spec](https://redocly.github.io/redoc/?url=https://raw.githubusercontent.com/couchbase/sync_gateway/main/docs/api/admin.yaml#tag/Document/operation/get_keyspace-_channel_history)

| `doc_id` (required)
| The document ID whose channel history you want to retrieve.

| `seq` (required)
| The sequence number threshold.
All inactive channels with history entries for sequences before this number are returned.
|===

*Example request:*

[source,bash]
----

> GET /mydb/_history?doc_id=order-12345&seq=98765

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GET /mydb/_channel_history/order-12345
```

----

*Example response:*

[source,json]

> ----
> {
>   "channels": [
>     "orders-2023",
>     "orders-archived"
>   ]
> }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{
  "orders-2023": [
    5,
    7
  ],
  "orders-archived":[7]
}
```

----

> The response lists the inactive channels that would be removed by a compact operation using the same sequence value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The response is a JSON object mapping each channel name to an array of sequences at which
        the document was removed from that channel.
```

> For the full API reference, see xref:ROOT:rest_api_admin_static.adoc#tag/Document/operation/get_keyspace-_history[GET /{keyspace}/_history].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the full API reference, see xref:ROOT:rest_api_admin_static.adoc#tag/Document/operation/get_keyspace-_channel_history[GET /{keyspace}/_channel_history/{docid}].
```

=== Compact Document Channel History

> Remove inactive channel history entries from one or more documents older than a specified sequence number.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Remove channel history entries from one or more documents older than a specified sequence number.
```

> *Endpoint:* `POST /{keyspace}/_history/compact`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Endpoint:* `POST /{keyspace}/_channel_history/{docid}/compact`
```

*Required RBAC roles:* Sync Gateway Application

[cols="1,3"]
|===
| Request body field | Description

| `doc_ids` (required)

> | Array of document IDs whose inactive channel history should be removed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
`doc_ids` are no longer required to be passed in the request body, it can be passed from the url path. The compaction is performed only on one document at a time

| `seq` (required)
| Sequence number boundary.

> All inactive channel history entries with sequences earlier than this value are removed from the specified documents.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All channel history entries with sequences earlier than this value are removed from the specified documents.
```

|===

*Example request:*

[source,bash]
----

> POST /mydb/_history/compact

Reviewer: ```suggestion
POST /mydb/_channel_history/order-12345/compact
```

----

[source,json]
----
{
  "doc_ids": [
    "order-12345",
    "order-67890"

>   ],
>   "seq": 98765
> }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{
  "seq": 98765
}
```

----

*Example response:*

[source,json]
----
{
  "order-12345": [
    "orders-2023",

>     "orders-archived"
>   ],
>   "order-67890": [
>     "orders-2023"
>   ]
> }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{
  "compacted_channels": [
    "orders-2023",
    "orders-archived"
  ]
}
```

----

The response maps each document ID to the list of channels that were removed.

> If a document ID has an empty array, no channels were pruned for that document at the specified sequence boundary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The response is a list of channels that were compacted.
```

> For the full API reference, see xref:ROOT:rest_api_admin_static.adoc#tag/Document/operation/post_keyspace-_history_compact[POST /{keyspace}/_history/compact].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the full API reference, see xref:ROOT:rest_api_admin_static.adoc#tag/Document/operation/post_keyspace-_channel_history-compact[POST /{keyspace}/_channel_history/{docid}/compact].
```

> == User Channel History

Reviewer: @adamcfraser Would like your opinion on this, if we want to call this User Channel History or User Access History

Reviewer: @iamfortune please rename this to User Access History
```suggestion
== User Access History
```

=== About User Channel History

{sgw} maintains a history of channel access grants and revocations for each user.
In deployments where channels are frequently granted and revoked, this history grows indefinitely in the user's metadata document.

The operational impact is specific to zero-checkpoint replications.
When a Couchbase Lite client performs a clear-start replication, such as after an app reinstall or a checkpoint rollback, {sgw} replays the user's full channel history.
Old revocation entries in that history are re-sent to the client for channels that are no longer relevant, causing {sgw} to perform unnecessary work and potentially triggering conflict resolution on the client.

Selectively removing channel entries from the history prevents {sgw} from sending revocations for those channels during future zero-checkpoint replications.
The operation does not affect the user's current channel access, does not modify underlying documents, and does not interrupt active continuous replications.

=== Retrieve User Channel History

Before compacting, retrieve the current channel access history for a user to confirm which channels are recorded.

> *Endpoint:* `GET /{db}/_user/{name}/_history`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Endpoint:* `GET /{db}/_user/{name}/_access_history`
```

*Required RBAC roles:* Sync Gateway Architect, Sync Gateway Application, Sync Gateway Application Read Only

*Example request:*

[source,bash]
----

> GET /mydb/_user/alice/_history

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GET /mydb/_user/alice/_access_history
```

----

*Example response:*

[source,json]
----
{
  "channels": {
    "inventory": {
      "default": [
        "warehouse-east",
        "warehouse-west-2023",
        "warehouse-archived"
      ]
    }
  }
}
----

The response shows all channel history entries organised by scope and collection.

> For the full API reference, see xref:ROOT:rest_api_admin_static.adoc#tag/Database-Security/operation/get_db-_user-name-_history[GET /{db}/_user/{name}/_history].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the full API reference, see xref:ROOT:rest_api_admin_static.adoc#tag/Database-Security/operation/get_db-_user-name-_access_history[GET /{db}/_user/{name}/_access_history].
```

=== Compact User Channel History

Remove specific channel entries from a user's channel access history.

> *Endpoint:* `POST /{db}/_user/{name}/_history/compact`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Endpoint:* `POST /{db}/_user/{name}/_access_history/compact`
```

*Required RBAC roles:* Sync Gateway Architect, Sync Gateway Application

Provide the channels you want to remove, organised by scope and collection.

*Example request:*

[source,bash]
----

> POST /mydb/_user/alice/_history/compact

Reviewer: ```suggestion
POST /mydb/_user/alice/_access_history/compact
```

----

[source,json]
----
{
  "channels": {
    "inventory": {
      "default": [
        "warehouse-west-2023",
        "warehouse-archived"
      ]
    }
  }
}
----

*Example response:*

[source,json]
----
{
  "channels": {
    "inventory": {
      "default": [
        "warehouse-west-2023",
        "warehouse-archived"
      ]
    }
  }
}
----

The response confirms the channels that were removed from the user's history.

> For the full API reference, see xref:ROOT:rest_api_admin_static.adoc#tag/Database-Security/operation/post_db-_user-name-_history_compact[POST /{db}/_user/{name}/_history/compact].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the full API reference, see xref:ROOT:rest_api_admin_static.adoc#tag/Database-Security/operation/post_db-_user-name-_access_history-compact[POST /{db}/_user/{name}/_access_history/compact].
```

== API Reference Summary

[cols="1,1,3"]
|===
| Endpoint | Method | Description

| `/{keyspace}/_history`
| GET

> | Retrieve inactive channel history entries for a document before a specified sequence.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `/{keyspace}/_channel_history/{docid}`
| GET
| Retrieve inactive channel history entries for a document.
```

| `/{keyspace}/_history/compact`
| POST

> | Remove inactive channel history entries from one or more documents older than a specified sequence.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `/{keyspace}/_channel_history/{docid}/compact`
| POST
| Remove inactive channel history entries from the specified document older than a specified sequence.
```

> | `/{db}/_user/{name}/_history`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `/{db}/_user/{name}/_access_history`
```

| GET
| Retrieve the full channel access history for a user.

> | `/{db}/_user/{name}/_history/compact`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `/{db}/_user/{name}/_access_history/compact`
```
